---
title: Installation
redirectFrom:
  - /display/PubOp/Install+Cytomine+on+Linux
  - /How-to-install-Cytomine
  - /admin-guide/ce/ce-install
---

# Install Cytomine

::: tip
If you experiment any issues, please describe your problem precisely [in our ticket system on Github.](https://github.com/cytomine/cytomine/issues)
:::

## Prerequisites

### Hardware

Cytomine is a set of multithreaded tools. A minimum of **8 CPU cores** is required. The number of required cores is proportional to the expected activity. The more you want to support active users, the more you need cores. For a server-setup configuration, we recommend to use at least **16 cores**.

Regarding memory, a minimum of **8 GB** is required, but we recommend at least **16 GB**.

Cytomine installation requires about **15GB**. You need to provide enough space to store your images (depends on their size). If database backup is enabled, extra-space has to be provided.

### Software

- A **Linux** operating system like [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/), [Debian](https://www.debian.org/), etc.
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)

### Runing App in Cytomine

To be able to execute apps in Cytomine, a cluster must be installed and running before proceeding with the installation. See [Clusters](/admin-guide/clusters/).

## Installation

This installation procedure is intended for desktop or laptop computers running Debian-based Linux operating systems.

> It is expected to have `root` permissions (sudo privileges in Debian/Ubuntu).

1. Clone the repository on your computer:

   ```bash
   git clone --branch 2025.1 https://github.com/cytomine/cytomine.git
   ```

2. Go into the cloned folder:

   ```bash
   cd cytomine
   ```

3. Edit the `cytomine.template` file to configure default values such as URLs or SMTP settings.

   ::: warning
   The variable `SCHEDULER_MASTER_URL` and `SCHEDULER_OAUTH_TOKEN` have to be set to the value generated by your cluster in order to use the App Engine. See [MicroK8s Cytomine configuration](/admin-guide/clusters/microk8s/installation#cytomine-configuration) for more information on how to get these values.
   :::

4. Launch the Cytomine installer. This will create all the folders and files necessary to launch Cytomine with Compose:

   ```bash
   sudo docker pull cytomine/installer
   sudo docker run -v $(pwd):/install --user "$(id -u):$(id -g)" --rm -it cytomine/installer:latest deploy -s /install
   ```

5. Launch cytomine:

   ```bash
   sudo docker compose up -d
   ```

   ::: warning
   This guide assumes a fresh installation of Cytomine.

   If a previous installation exists, network-related errors may occur. Refer to the [Troubleshooting](/admin-guide/ce/troubleshooting) section for more information.
   :::

6. Cytomine is ready to be used:

   - If you have kept the default values your Cytomine is now available on <http://127.0.0.1/>.
   - A default admin account is created. To access the platform via your browser, retrieve the generated admin password from `cytomine.yml` with
   ```bash
   yq -r '.services.default.core.constant.ADMIN_PASSWORD' cytomine.yml
   ```
   - Use the retrieved password with the `admin` username to access your Cytomine instance.

::: tip
Once authenticated, it is recommended to update the default administrator password to a more secure one.
:::

## Update configuration

To modify the configuration of a running instance:

1. Update the configuration in the `cytomine.template` file.
2. Relaunch the Cytomine installer to apply the updates to your configuration file:

   ```bash
   sudo docker pull cytomine/installer
   sudo docker run -v $(pwd):/install --user "$(id -u):$(id -g)" --rm -it cytomine/installer:latest deploy -s /install
   ```

3. Restart your running instance:

   ```bash
   sudo docker compose restart
   ```

## Stop Cytomine

To stop your Cytomine instance:

```bash
sudo docker compose down
```

The server will be stopped, but the data, including databases and images, will be preserved.

## What's Next?

For additional setup options, see the [Configuration](./configuration.md) section.
